The Python tutorial
Python is an easy to learn, powerful programming language. It has eficiente high-level data structures and a
simple but effective approach to object-oriented programming. Pyhton's elegant syntax and Dynamic typing, 
together with its interpreted nature, make it an ideal language for scripting and rapid application development
in many áreas on most platforms.

The Python interpreter and the extensive standard library are freely available in source on binary form for all
major platforms from the Python web site, https://wwww.python.org/, and many be freely distributed. The same site
also contains distributions of and pointers to many free third party Python modules, programs ans tolos, and
additional documentation.

The Python Python interpreter is easily extended with new functions and data types implemented in C or C++ (or
other languages callable from C). Pyhton is also suitable as an extensión language for customizable applications.

This tutorial introduces the reader informally to the basic concepts and features of the Python language and
system. It helps to have a Python interpreter Handy for hands-on experience, but all examples are self-contained,
so the tutorial can be read off-line as well.

For a description of standard objects and modules, see The Python Standard Library. The Python language reference
gives a more formal definition of the language. To write extensions in C or C++, read Extending and Embedding
the Python interpreter and Python/C API Reference Manual. There are also several books covering Python in Depth.

This tutorial does not attempt to be comprehensive and cover every single feature, or even every commonly used
feature. Instead, it intoduces many of Python's most noteworthy feactures, and Will give you a good idea of the
languages's flavor and style. After Reading it, you Will be able to read and write Python modules and programs,
and you Will be ready to lern more about the various Python library modules described in The Python Standard
Library.

The Glossary, is also worth going through.

1. Whetting your apetite
2. usinng the Python interprete


